Well, good evening. Actually, it's going to be in the morning when we hear this. I'm
speaking now to Dr. Ray Peat. And Ray, could you sort of introduce yourself a bit, please?
Okay. I had been a student of several other subjects such as linguistics when I began studying
biology in 1968 and I had begun in brain biology at the University of Oregon because of my
years of interest in psychology and linguistics. But as I ran into dogmatism, I decided to
get to the biology of reproduction and aging because it happened at the University of Oregon.
These people were less dogmatic than the ones in nerve biology. And some of the most interesting
work at the University was being done in biochemistry and so most of my course work was in biochemistry
and endocrinology and the biology of progesterone, estrogen and tissue respiration was the center
of my thesis and that led to interest in organismic respiration as controlled by thyroid and its
interactions with progesterone and estrogen. And by chance, before I had begun studying
at the University in 1968, I had visited Russia to talk to a biologist there who was studying
the interactions of magnetic fields and nervous system and the endocrine system and because
of my contact with the Russian literature, I ran into Buteko's work right around that
same time and I respected what he was doing because he was one of the few people in the
world that really took the physiology of carbon dioxide seriously. So many American biologists
and physicians in particular think of it as a waste material rather than as a crucial
biochemical. In the early 1940s, someone demonstrated that many organisms can live and reproduce
even without oxygen but they could find no cell or organism that could live and reproduce
in the absence of carbon dioxide. So biologically, it's in a way much more fundamental than oxygen
and I didn't study much of Buteko after that. I was just aware that he was one of the few
people who had worked out the complex biochemical effects of carbon dioxide but I would periodically
check what the Russians were doing in relation to carbon dioxide physiology. There were a
few others besides Buteko, but it was really central to many of the things that I worked
on because progesterone and carbon dioxide, for example, both have an energizing and calming
effect on all cells, everything from the brain to the secretory and hormonal effects of carbon
dioxide, respiratory and hormonal tissues. My interest was not particularly in relation
to asthma, but Buteko noticed many other effects of carbon dioxide when he was working with
people treating asthma as the focus. He noticed that some of the patients recovered from other
degenerative terminal diseases and those have been where I've spent most of my effort thinking
about the role of carbon dioxide in all of the inflammatory and degenerative diseases
and how it works synergistically with progesterone and protectively against the toxic effects
of estrogen and other excitatory molecules. It turns out that all of the degenerative
diseases are centered on an excess of inflammatory processes which de-energize the cells and
shift the metabolism away from the production of carbon dioxide with a dominant tendency
towards producing lactic acid in excess that can't be consumed and converted to carbon dioxide.
Well, that's a great introduction, Ray. As usual, wonderfully complex. Now, as I said
to you before, there was some question about the Buteko method and why it works. Could
you speak a little bit about that in terms of your thoughts about why reduced breathing
would have the kind of profound effect that it is having?
Okay. One of the effects of the thyroid hormone is to increase the consumption of oxygen in
that means to increase the production of carbon dioxide. When the thyroid hormone is
properly active, it increases the ratio of progesterone to estrogen. This shifts the
balance in the body away from lactic acid towards carbon dioxide. If you define hyperventilation
as a tendency to blow off the carbon dioxide, any time you produce too much lactic acid,
it stimulates your respiratory center and it makes you lose carbon dioxide. Lactic acid
itself excites the inflammatory process in all of the tissues where carbon dioxide inhibits
it. There are several things that will shift a person towards an excess ventilation or
a hyperventilation and simply low thyroid function, which makes you unable to produce enough carbon
dioxide. Your cells produce too much lactic acid in compensation and that drives the respiratory
system inappropriately and makes you lose a little bit of carbon dioxide that you are
producing. Hypothyroidism is one of the basic things driving hyperventilation. There tends
to be excess adrenaline in hypothyroidism compensating, keeping the organism running even though it
might run at a low temperature. Sometimes hypothyroid people have 40 times more adrenaline
production in a day than the normal person. Adrenaline is another thing that can shift
you towards hyperventilation. Endotoxin is always being absorbed from the intestine and
endotoxin stimulates hyperventilation and overproduction of lactic acid and the activation
of inflammatory processes. One of the driving forces behind asthma is the tendency to have
too much endotoxin being absorbed producing an inflammatory state of the respiratory system
and that can be detected as an exhalation of nitric oxide, a pre-radical that's dead
in the body. Patients with asthma exhale much more nitric oxide in their breath and most
of it is produced in the bronchial system although inflammation anywhere in the body
can raise the production of nitric oxide. Carbon dioxide will antagonize that energy
of nitric oxide and lower the inflammation so simply providing carbon dioxide works against
some of the basic mechanisms involved in asthma. One of the interesting things about estrogen
treatment of menopausal women is that it causes a shift towards alkalosis and increases the
risk of asthma and that's partly because it increases endotoxin absorption from the
intestine and circulation in the bloodstream and partly because estrogen lowers the thyroid
function. All of which tend to lower the production of carbon dioxide leading to a relative hyperventilation
and alkalosis which helps to excite the inflammation and contraction in the bronchial system.
Well now by reducing the breathing voluntarily working at reducing the breathing, does it
make sense that you would then at that point be raising the CO2 levels?
Yes, yes. If you breathe in a paper bag it's the same thing as voluntarily holding your
breath. Swimming underwater will do the same thing. Any time you hold your breath or breathe
in a paper bag or force yourself to stay underwater for as long as you can stand, that is raising
the carbon dioxide and sort of acting as a sedative on your nervous system so you stop
the excited adrenaline driven overventilation and you can gradually train yourself with
a paper bag or swimming underwater or just making the deliberate effort not to breathe
so much. I think it's good to do everything you can at the same time, for example, living
at a high altitude. In Mexico City despite the pollution, the incidence of asthma is
drastically lower than it is in the lower altitude cities and that's undoubtedly because
of the retention of carbon dioxide at high altitude where the oxygen pressure is lower.
Uh-huh, I see. Now one of the things that we've noticed and as you say when you learned
about Botteco he was treating an awful lot of more things than asthma ultimately. One
of the things that seems to respond very, very rapidly is panic attacks. Probably exactly
for the mechanism that you're talking about, the excitotoxicity is really driven down by
loading up carbon dioxide. We even have a number of small exercises that we do that
are rather simple when somebody even has an attack at night to actually calm themselves
down by using a series of shallow breathing exercises, all of which build up the CO2.
Yeah, and there's a drug called the Cetus olimide. The brand name is Diamox. It used
to be considered diuretic but it became popular to prevent altitude sickness because it causes
you to retain carbon dioxide and hyperventilators are the people who are susceptible to altitude
sickness. And so taking this Cetus olimide makes you retain your carbon dioxide by inhibiting
the carbonic anhydrase enzyme and prevents altitude sickness. But it also prevents over
breathing and alkalosis at night. People who have sleep disordered breathing, it's found
that the Cetus olimide will usually cure that and it's very effective in treating asthma,
which is one of the pretty correct ways to show that carbon dioxide deficiency is so
closely related to asthma and other breathing disorders. Epilepsy is another thing that
can be prevented with a Cetus olimide or anything that raises your carbon dioxide. And neurologists
used to demonstrate an epileptic brainwave just by having a person's hyperventilate.
Yes, well we've been able to stop epileptic seizure. I mean, when someone knows, generally
they know when their aura starts and so if they practice reduced breathing when that
comes up they don't have seizures. Yes, the old fashioned way to do that was just to give
them a paper bag and they can breathe in the paper bag for seizures or migraine or panic
attacks or whatever. Now I remember you once telling me that at one point there was something
called, I think it was called Fireman's Oxygen, in which they had about 6 to 8 percent carbon
dioxide in the oxygen. Yes, and Bill Henderson was the physiologist who got that popular to
the point that fire departments all over the country started using it because the carbon
dioxide at that very high concentration is extremely effective for restoring respiration
to suffocated people and for babies too that don't breathe properly. Is anyone still using
carbon dioxide, isn't it used or was used at some points in operation rooms? Oh, every
now and then there's some person who says that the hospitals are killing patients by
giving them pure oxygen and saying that they would wish that hospitals would start using
5 to 8 percent carbon dioxide whenever they give oxygen because it's basically stress-inducing
and toxic to give people oxygen in excess. At sea level we really have an excess of oxygen.
In biological examples, I think, to reinforce the importance of carbon dioxide, rats normally
live maximum of 2 or 3 years, but an animal called the naked mole rat lives in sealed
burrows underground and they're about the same size as ordinary rats, but they live
about 30 years and in their burrows they have an extremely high concentration of carbon dioxide
and low concentration of oxygen and bats who are famous for living in caves where the CO2
is high with a million bats in the same cave and someone was attacking bats and trying
to find out things about their life history and no one really knows how long the average
bat lives, but one dead bat was found that had been egged 42 years previously. So comparing
that to a mouse with the same body weight, I think that illustrates how important CO2
is. You have many papers that are written in regard to CO2. In fact, we have at least
a couple, maybe more than two of your papers are up on the international site, on Peter
Kolb's site. You were very generous to allow us to put those up. Any kind of closing remarks
would you like to say? I know you could go on for hours about this, but any particular
closing remarks you'd like to say in regard to CO2 and its function in so many different
ways in illness? Well, you have to be cautious around doctors because doctors still tend
to think of carbon dioxide as a waste material and they tend to shut their ears if you mention
the beneficial effects of carbon dioxide. It's amazing when you think that it's in
the primary physiology textbooks, the Bohr effect is primary physiology. There's much
more basic physiology that's even more interesting than that. For example, the focus of the eye,
the thickness of the cornea, the transparency of the cornea and the lens and so on. Carbon
dioxide is essential for practically all biological processes and it's rightly ignored even though
the basic science is there. Well, I want to thank you so much for being available for
this brief interview and I'm going to be putting out to everybody that they should definitely
be visiting your website and to get your journals and to look into the previous journals that
you've written in regard to carbon dioxide and of course anything else that they're interested
in. It's a wide range of things that you have available to people. So thank you so much
Ray and appreciate your friendship and your collegial assistance and support through the
years. Thank you so much. Okay. Bye now. Bye.
[End of Audio]